:source-highlighter: coderay
[[threddsDocs]]

= Restricting Access to Datasets in the TDS

There are two ways to restrict access to datasets.

== 1. Restrict by URL using Tomcat +

You can use the built in Tomcat mechanism to restrict a pattern of URLs,
by adding <security-constraint> elements into the web.xml file. The
following fragment will force all URL accesses that have the
*urlPattern* to authorized users with the role **roleName**. The
<transport-guarantee> elements forces a switch to using an SSL socket. +

-------------------------------------------------------------
  <security-constraint>
    <web-resource-collection>
      <web-resource-name>restrict by URL</web-resource-name>

  <url-pattern>urlPattern</url-pattern>
      <http-method>GET</http-method>
    </web-resource-collection>
    <auth-constraint>

  <role-name>roleName</role-name>
    </auth-constraint>
    <user-data-constraint>
      <transport-guarantee>CONFIDENTIAL</transport-guarantee>
    </user-data-constraint>
  </security-constraint>
-------------------------------------------------------------

A concrete example might look like: +

-------------------------------------------------------------
  <security-constraint>
    <web-resource-collection>
      <web-resource-name>restrict by URL</web-resource-name>
      <url-pattern>/dodsC/dataRoot/*</url-pattern>
      <http-method>GET</http-method>
    </web-resource-collection>
    <auth-constraint>
      <role-name>tiggeRole</role-name>
    </auth-constraint>
    <user-data-constraint>
      <transport-guarantee>CONFIDENTIAL</transport-guarantee>
    </user-data-constraint>
  </security-constraint>
-------------------------------------------------------------

**Note that you don’t include /thredds in the url-pattern**. Also note
that if you are using multiple data services, you must include each
service’s URL pattern, for example:

------------------------------------------------------------
    <web-resource-collection>
      <web-resource-name>restrict by URL</web-resource-name>
      <url-pattern>/dodsC/testEnhanced/*</url-pattern>

  <url-pattern>/fileServer/testEnhanced/*</url-pattern>
      <http-method>GET</http-method>
    </web-resource-collection>
------------------------------------------------------------

Using Tomcat to provide restricted access works well when you want to
restrict your entire site to a single set of users. When you want to
give access to different datasets to different users, you must
understand in some detail what the URLs look like.

== 2. Restrict by Dataset using TDS Catalog +

A more fine-grained approach is to modify the dataset elements in the
TDS configuration catalog. To do this, you add an attribute on a dataset
or datasetScan element in the TDS catalog, eg
**restrictAccess="roleName"**. All services that use that dataset will
be restricted to users with the named role.

When a client tries to access a restricted dataset, it is redirected to
a URL that triggers a security challenge. If the challenge is
successful, the client is redirected back to the original dataset URL,
except now it has an authenticated session, represented by a session
cookie passed to the client. For subsequent requests by the same client,
no authentication is needed as long as the session remains valid.

The default TDS configuration uses
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digest_authentication[Digest
authentication]. By modifying web.xml, the server administrator can
require that authentication be done differently, for example require SSL
(changes to the TDS web.xml must be manually propagated to new versions
of the TDS when upgrading). You can also
<<PluggableRestrictedAccess#,plug in your own>> Authentication.

To access any restricted dataset that a TDS might serve, a client such
as a browser, OPeNDAP enabled application, or WCS client, must be able
to:

1.  follow redirects, including circular redirects.
2.  switch to SSL and back.
3.  perform Basic and Digest authentication
4.  answer security challenges with the appropriate user name and
password.
5.  return session cookies.

=== Configuring Restricted Datasets

*1.* Decide on distinct sets of datasets that need to be restricted. For
each set, choose a name called a __*security role*__. Avoid special
characters in the role names, especially */"><’* and space. For example,
suppose you have three sets of restricted data that you call
**ccsmData**, **fieldProject**, *tiggeData__.__*

*2.* Add each role to the *$\{tomcat_home}/conf/tomcat-users.xml* file,
along with the *restrictedDatasetUser* role:****

------------------------------------------
  <role rolename="restrictedDatasetUser"/>
  <role rolename="ccsmData"/>
  <role rolename="fieldProject"/>
  <role rolename="tiggeData"/>
------------------------------------------

If you only have one set of datasets that you want to restrict, you can
use just the *restrictedDatasetUser* (ie you don’t need to have multiple
roles). However you must always use the name
__*restrictedDatasetUser*__.

**3**. Add each user who should have authorization to the
*tomcat-users.xml* file. A user may have multiple roles, *and* **must
always have the _restrictedDatasetUser_ role**, eg:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  <user username="john" password="dorkology" roles="ccsmData,restrictedDatasetUser"/>
  <user username="tiggeUser" password="flabulate" roles="tiggeData,restrictedDatasetUser"/>
  <user username="luci" password="designated" roles="fieldProject,tiggeData,restrictedDatasetUser"/>
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Make sure that none of these *restrictedDatasetUsers* have any of the
``secure'' roles such as _tdsConfig, manager,_ or __admin__. (Here’s
<<TomcatSecurity#Separate,why>>). In this example we are storing
passwords in cleartext, but you are advised to
<<TomcatSecurity#Digest,store passwords in digest form>>.

You can also manage users and roles with the tomcat admin application,
if you
havehttp://wiki.apache.org/tomcat/HowTo#head-f50555909547d981d0e2b030323632b26047013e[installed
it].

**4**. In the TDS configuration catalogs, add
*restrictAccess=__\{security role}__* attributes to the *dataset* or
*datasetScan* elements. This will also restrict access to all children
of those dataset. Example:

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<catalog name="TDS Catalog" xmlns="http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/namespaces/thredds/InvCatalog/v1.0">

  <service name="thisDODS" serviceType="OpenDAP" base="/thredds/dodsC/" />
  <datasetRoot path="test" location="/data/testdata/"/>

  <dataset name="Test Single Dataset" ID="testDataset" serviceName="thisDODS"
      urlPath="test/testData.nc" restrictAccess="tiggeData">

    <dataset name="Nested" ID="nested" serviceName="thisDODS" urlPath="test/nested/testData.nc" />
  </dataset>

  <datasetScan name="Test all files in a directory" ID="testDatasetScan"
      path="testAll" location="/data/testdata" restrictAccess="ccsmData" >

    <metadata inherited="true">
      <serviceName>thisDODS</serviceName>
    </metadata>

  </datasetScan>
</catalog>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The dataset with ID __testDataset__, as well as its child dataset
_nested_ are restricted, as are all the datasets generated by the
datasetScan. Users can see these datasets in the catalogs, but when they
try to access the data, they will be challenged.

**4**. After restarting Tomcat, use a browser to navigate to a
restricted dataset. You should be prompted for a username and password.
This must match a user that has a role matching the *restrictAccess*
attribute on the dataset.

==== Troubleshooting:

* If your browser has cached credentials which are wrong, it will simply
send them without giving you a chance to renter. Firefox, at least,
doesn’t seem to have a way to clear this cache. Try exiting all
instances of the browser and restarting it.
* You are denied access when you enter in your username/password, but
subsequent tests allow you to access the data. Make sure that your user
has both the *restrictedDatasetUser* and the particular security role
needed for that dataset.

'''''

== Requiring SSL authentication

To require authentication to be done over
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SSL[SSL], do everything in the default
configuration above, plus the following:

=== 1. Enable Tomcat Security / SSL

You must <<RemoteManagement#SSL,enable Secure Sockets>>. See the
<<RemoteManagement#,TDS Remote Management>> guide.

We also recommend that you <<TomcatSecurity#Digest,store Digest
Passwords>>. See the <<TomcatSecurity#,Tomcat Security>> guide.

=== 2. Modify the TDS web.xml file

After _thredds.war_ is expanded, edit
**$\{tomcat_home}/webapps/thredds/WEB-INF/web.xml**.

*2.1* Find the following element:

-------------------------------------------------------------
  <security-constraint>
    <web-resource-collection>
      <web-resource-name>restrictedAccess</web-resource-name>
      <url-pattern>/restrictedAccess/*</url-pattern>
      <http-method>GET</http-method>
    </web-resource-collection>
    <auth-constraint>
      <role-name>restrictedDatasetUser</role-name>
    </auth-constraint>
  </security-constraint>
-------------------------------------------------------------

Add the following to it:

-------------------------------------------------------------
  <security-constraint>
    <web-resource-collection>
      <web-resource-name>restrictedAccess</web-resource-name>
      <url-pattern>/restrictedAccess/*</url-pattern>
      <http-method>GET</http-method>
    </web-resource-collection>
    <auth-constraint>
      <role-name>restrictedDatasetUser</role-name>
    </auth-constraint>

  <user-data-constraint>
 <transport-guarantee>CONFIDENTIAL</transport-guarantee>
 </user-data-constraint>
  </security-constraint>
-------------------------------------------------------------

*2.2* Find the following element:

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   <!-- Restricted Access (using Tomcat) -->
  <servlet>
    <servlet-name>RestrictedDataset</servlet-name>
    <servlet-class>thredds.servlet.restrict.RestrictedDatasetServlet</servlet-class>
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--------------------------------------------------------------------------
     <init-param>
      <param-name>Authorizer</param-name>
      <param-value>thredds.servlet.restrict.TomcatAuthorizer</param-value>
    </init-param>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

--------------------------------------
    <init-param>
      <param-name>useSSL</param-name>
      <param-value>false</param-value>
    </init-param>
--------------------------------------

--------------------------------------
    <init-param>
      <param-name>portSSL</param-name>
      <param-value>8443</param-value>
    </init-param>
--------------------------------------

----------------------------------------
    <load-on-startup>2</load-on-startup>
 </servlet>
----------------------------------------

Change *useSSL* to **true**, and change *portSSL* to the correct value
if it is not 8443. +

=== 3. Restart Tomcat and Test

==== Troubleshooting:

* Your browser may tell you that your server certificate has expired.
<<RemoteManagement#SSL,Create a new one>>, and restart Tomcat.
* Your browser will cache credentials (passwords), which may interfere
with your ability to test these features. Turn password saving off,
delete saved passwords, and restart your browser if needed.

== Unique Realm Name

If you are not using SSL, it is more secure to have a Realm name unique
to your server, then to use the default _THREDDS Data Server_ Realm
name, so we recommend that you change it in the web.xml file. This name
is presented to the user during authentication, so it should be
descriptive and include the hostname, for example:

----------------------------------------------------------------------
  <login-config>
    <auth-method>DIGEST</auth-method>
    <realm-name>Unidata IDD Server (motherload.ucar.edu))</realm-name>
  </login-config>
----------------------------------------------------------------------
