:source-highlighter: coderay
[[threddsDocs]]

= Using Records in NetCDF-3 files

John Caron

last changed: June 21, 2005

== Contents:

* link:#Structures[Structures and Record Variables]
* link:#Point[Using Records for Point Data]
* link:#Station[Using Records for Station Data]
* link:#Trajectory[Using Records for Trajectory Data]
* link:#Sounding[Using Records for Sounding Data]
* link:#Conclusions[Conclusions]

'''''

== Structures and Record variables

In the NetCDF version 3 data model, _*record variables*_ are ones that
use the *unlimited dimension* (also known as the **record dimension**).
These are laid out on disk differently than non-record variables. All of
the data for a non-record variable is stored contiguously on disk.
Record variables, in contrast, are divided up into **records**, and each
record contains the data for all record variables for the ith record
dimension index. You can append an unlimited number of records to a
NetCDF file.

A _*Structure*_ is a NetCDF Variable that contains other Variables, like
a *struct* in C. All of the data in a Structure are stored together on
disk, so it is efficient to read all the data in a Structure in a single
read. Structures are a new part of NetCDF, introduced in the
http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/netcdf-java/index.html[NetCDF-Java]
library, version 2.2 as part of the Common Data Model (CDM), and also
implemented in the
https://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/netcdf/index.html[NetCDF-4]
library.

Since data for Record variables is stored together on disk, this
satisfies the definition of a Structure. NetCDF-3 files that use the
unlimited dimension therefore can be thought of as having a Structure
named __*record*__, containing the record variables. For example, the
file

--------------------------------
netcdf example {
 dimensions:
   time = UNLIMITED;
   dim = 42;

 variables:
   float non-record_var1;
   float non-record_var2( dim);

 float record_var1(time);
  float record_var2( time, dim);
}
--------------------------------

In the enhanced CDL used by the Common Data Model, this would be:

-------------------------------
netcdf example {
 dimensions:
   time = UNLIMITED;
   dim = 42;

 variables:
   float non-record_var1;
   float non-record_var2( dim);

 Structure {
  float record_var1;
  float record_var2( dim);
  } record( time);
}
-------------------------------

Our motivation is to efficiently access all of the data in the record
variables for some record, i.e. use a single read to fetch the ith
record. This would be useful if your common data access pattern is
``structure-oriented'', eg if you iterate over time, and read all the
data for all Variables for each time step before moving on to the next
time step. If the common access pattern is to read all the data for one
Variable over all times, then it will be more efficient to store the
Variable data contiguously, i.e. make them non-record variables. Access
times for these two patterns can differ by an order of magnitude or more
for large files.

Another reason to use record variables is to take advantage of the
ability to append an unlimited number of records. This can allow you to
write out realtime data as it arrives, without knowing how many records
you will need.

Note that in all these examples, you can use the record dimension or
not. If writing both ways is possible, then you should determine (or
guess) the common read access patterns to decide whether to use the
record dimension or not.

With the NetCDF-Java 2.2 library, if your data has an unlimited
dimension you can create the record structure by calling
*NetcdfFile.addRecordStructure()* or
**NetcdfDataset.addRecordStructure()**. This will add a Structure
variable named ``record'' to the file; then you can use
*Structure.readStructure()* to efficiently read all the data in each
record with one call.

== Using Records for Point Data

For Point data, we store measurements taken at various ``point''
locations, where the locations differ for each measurement, and are not
connected to each other. For this simple case, we might have:

----------------------------------
netcdf pointData {
 dimensions:
   record = UNLIMITED;
   dim1 = 11;
   dim2 = 4;

 variables:

    float latitude(record);
    float longitude(record);
    int elevation(record);
    int time_observation(record);

    float obs_data1(record) ;
    float obs_data2(record, dim1);
    int obs_data3(record);
    int obs_data4(record, dim2);
    String obs_data5(record);
    ...
}
----------------------------------

== Using Records for Station Data

In this case the measurements occur at named locations, called
__*stations*__. Typically there are a number of measurements taken at
each station periodically. The file then contains a collection of
stations, and each station has a time series of observations.

Using nested CDM Structures, we could model this data in the following
way:

---------------------------
netcdf stationData {
 dimensions:
   station = 137;

 variables:

   Structure {
    char id(8);
    char description(40);
    float latitude;
    float longitude;
    int elevation;
    int numReports;

    Structure {
      int time_observation;
      float obs_data1 ;
      float obs_data2(11);
      int obs_data3;
      int obs_data4(4);
      String obs_data5;
      ...
    } stationObs(*);

  } station( station);
}
---------------------------

This describes an array of *station* Structures, each of which has an
**id, description, latitude, longitude, and elevation**, as well as a
nested, variable length array of *stationObs* Structures. The (*) means
that each station can have a different length array of stationObs. (Note
that in the CDM, we can use unnamed dimensions for some of the
dimensions, while in netCDF-3 we have to declare all dimensions as
shared.)

In NetCDF-3, we don’t have the ability to store nested Structures, and
we only have one real Structure to use, the record Structure. What we
can do is to make the station data into a **_pseudo-Structure_**, which
is collection of variables which all have the same outer dimension (it’s
not a real Structure because the variables are not stored contiguously).
We then can use the record Structure for the station observation data,
and connect them to the station in several ways.

\1) We can use a _*linked list*_ of record numbers:

-----------------------------------------
netcdf stationData {
 dimensions:
 station = 137;
   record = UNLIMITED;
   id_len = 8;
   desc_len = 40;
   od2_len = 11;
   od4_len = 4;

 variables:

    char id(station, id_len);
    char description(station, desc_len);
    float latitude(station);
    float longitude(station);
    int elevation(station);
    int firstStationObs(station);
    int numReports(station);

 int nextStationObs(record);
 int stationIndex(record);
    int time_observation(record);
    float obs_data1(record) ;
    float obs_data2(record, od2_len);
    int obs_data3(record);
    int obs_data4(record, od4_len);
    String obs_data5(record);
    ...
}
-----------------------------------------

Notice that the station data variables all have the dimension
**station**, and the stationObs data are all record variables . The
*firstStationObs* and *nextStationObs* variables create a _*linked
list*_ of stationObs for each station. The *stationIndex* variable,
while not strictly needed, lets you find the station from a stationObs
data record. This linked list makes it easy to get all the stationObs
for one station (but note that there’s no efficient subsetting of that
list, so its not really a variable length array). If you are writing
data as it arrives, it will be easier to keep track of a backwards list,
e.g. use variables *lastStationObs* and **prevStationObs**.

The advantage of the linked list is that you can have a variable number
of stationObs for each station, and you don’t waste any space. Its also
ideal for writing files as the data arrives in random order.

\2) If you have complete control over how the data is written, then
another option is to store variable length data in one array in a
__*contiguous list*__. In our example, then, all the observations
between *firstStationObs(i)* and *firstStationObs(i)* + *numReports(i) -
1* would belong to the *ith* ship, and we dont need the *nextStationObs*
variable. This also allows a variable number of stationObs for each
station with no wasted space, plus the contiguity of the observation
records gives very efficient access for the common case of reading all
the observations for one station. However you lose the ability to write
the data in random order.

\3) If there is a fixed number of stationObs for each station, then a
good file layout is:

--------------------------------------------
netcdf stationData {
 dimensions:
 station = UNLIMITED;
   nobs = 24;
   id_len = 8;
   desc_len = 40;
   od2_len = 11;
   od4_len = 4;

 variables:

    char id(station, id_len);
    char description(station, desc_len);
    float latitude(station);
    float longitude(station);
    int elevation(station);

    int time_observation(station, nobs);
    float obs_data1(station, nobs) ;
    float obs_data2(station, nobs, od2_len);
    int obs_data3(station, nobs);
    int obs_data4(station, nobs, od4_len);
    String obs_data5(station, nobs);
    ...
}
--------------------------------------------

Here we use the station dimension as the unlimited dimension, in order
to group all the data for one station together on disk. This simple
_*multidimensional structure*_ may be the best solution when the number
of observations for each station is constant.

== Using Records for Trajectory Data

Trajectory data looks just like point data, except the points are
assumed to be connected. The case where there is a single trajectory in
the file therefore looks just like the link:#Point[Point Data] case.

If you want to store multiple trajectories in the same file, however,
then the file looks like station data, since you have to distinguish
which trajectory the record belongs to. Again, you can use linked lists,
contiguous lists, or multidimensional structures. Here is an example for
the linked list case:

-------------------------------------------------
netcdf trajectoryData {
 dimensions:
 trajectory = 11;
 record = UNLIMITED;

 variables:
   int trajectory(trajectory); // some kind of id
   int firstObs(trajectory);
   int numObs(trajectory);

   int nextObs(record);
 int trajectoryIndex(record);
   int time_observation(record);
   float latitude(record);
   float longitude(record);
   int depth(record);

   float obs_data1(record);
   int obs_data2(record);
   int obs_data3(record);
   ...
}
-------------------------------------------------

Contiguous lists look just like linked lists except that you dont need
the *nextObs* variable to store the link, and of course, you have to
store the observations contiguously.

== Using Records for Sounding Data

There are other data measurements where you might need another level of
nested structures. For example, a collection of ship trajectories, with
variable length sounding data at points along the trajectory:

---------------------------
netcdf soundingData {
 dimensions:
   ship = 137;

 variables:
   Structure {
    char id(8);
    char description(40);

    Structure {
      float latitude;
      float longitude;
      int time_observation;
      float obs_data1 ;
      float obs_data2(11);
      ...

      Structure {
        int depth;
        int obs_data3;
        int obs_data4(4);
        String obs_data5;
          ...
      } observation(*)

    } sounding(*);

  } ship( ship);
}
---------------------------

So this file has a number of ship _tracks_ (a kind of trajectory), each
containing a variable number of __soundings__, and each sounding
consists of a variable number of observations, which is a collection of
measurements all taken at the same location.

If there are always the same number of observations for each sounding
(or there is a maximum number and you don’t mind wasting some space),
you might use the record structure for the soundings, and create a
contiguous list to connect them to the ship:

---------------------------------------------------
netcdf soundingData {
 dimensions:
 ship = 137;
   observation = 24;
   record = UNLIMITED;

 variables:
    char ship(ship, id_len);
    char description(ship, desc_len);
    int firstSounding(ship);
    int numSoundings(ship);

    int shipIndex( record);
    float latitude(record);
    float longitude(record);
    float obs_data1(record) ;
    float obs_data2(record, extra_dim1);

    float depth(record, observation);
    int time(record);
    int obs_data3(record, observation);
    int obs_data4(record, observation, extra_dim2);
    String obs_data5(record, observation);
    ...
}
---------------------------------------------------

This puts all the data for one sounding (including the observation data)
in a single record. For full generality, we assume that the depths of
the soundings vary; if they were always the same, you might want to
factor them out into a variable like **float depth( observation)**.

For a variable number of observations per sounding, you could use the
record structure for the observations:

-----------------------------------------
netcdf soundingData {
 dimensions:
 ship = 137;
    sounding = 4700;
 record = UNLIMITED;

 variables:
   char ship(ship, id_len);
   char description(ship, desc_len);
   int firstSounding(ship);
   int numSoundings(ship);

 int shipIndex(sounding);
   float latitude(sounding);
   float longitude(sounding);
   float obs_data1(sounding) ;
   float obs_data2(sounding, extra_dim1);
   int firstObservation(sounding);
   int numObservations(sounding);
   ...

   int soundingIndex( record);
   int time(record);
   float depth(record);
   int obs_data3(record);
   int obs_data4(record, extra_dim2);
   ...
}
-----------------------------------------

So we have a contiguous list of soundings for each ship, and a
contiguous list of observations for each sounding. We are not wasting
any space on the observations, but we may be wasting space on allocating
more sounding structures than we need, if we dont know up front how many
there are. Since these are contiguous lists, all of the observation data
for one sounding are stored together on disk. If we use linked lists,
the data for one sounding could be scattered across the file. Generally,
contiguity gives more efficient access for the common case of reading
all the data in a Structure.

If there is only one ship trajectory stored in the file, things get a
bit simpler:

-----------------------------------------
netcdf soundingData {
 dimensions:
    sounding = 1200;
 record = UNLIMITED;

 variables:
   char ship_name(id_len);
   char description(desc_len);

   float latitude(sounding);
   float longitude(sounding);
   int time_observation(sounding);
   float obs_data1(sounding) ;
   float obs_data2(sounding, extra_dim1);
   int firstObservation(sounding);
   int numObservations(sounding);
   ...

   int soundingIndex( record);
   int time(record);
   float depth( record);
   int obs_data3(record);
   int obs_data4(record, extra_dim2);
   ...
}
-----------------------------------------

== Conclusions

The use of record variables has been demonstrated with various examples
for point, station, trajectory, and sounding data. We can use the
generality of the CDM to create idealized representations of complicated
data structures. It then becomes easier to see how to map those data
structures back into ones that are representable in NetCDF-3 files.
Grouping variables into Structures and pseudo-Structures is a useful
conceptual tool.

There are a number of tradeoffs when deciding on a NetCDF-3 file
structure, depending upon how much variable length data you have, as
well as expected data access patterns. Linked lists are best for writing
data arriving in random order, contiguous lists give more efficient read
access for ordered data, and multidimensional structures work well when
there are a fixed number of records. In optimizing, you must take into
account the file layouts of record vs. non-record variables.

Its not easy to infer the type of data (e.g. station, trajectory, etc)
that a file contains by examining its data structures. We have seen some
examples here where different data types might use identical data
structures. We recommend explicitly describing the file’s data type,
especially its connectivity and its coordinate system(s), in the file
metadata and in a human-readable
http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/netcdf/conventions.html[Conventions]
document.
