---
title: Tomcat Log Files
last_updated: 2018-11-02
sidebar: tdsTutorial_sidebar
toc: false
permalink: tomcat_log_files.html
---

This section examines the log files generated by the Tomcat Servlet Container and the information found in them.

{%include note.html content="
This section assumes you have successfully installed the JDK and Tomcat Servlet Container as outlined in the <a href=\"install_java_tomcat.html\" target=\"_blank\">Installation of Java and Tomcat</a> section.
" %}

## Tomcat `logs/` Directory

Look at the different types of log files being generated in the `$TOMCAT_HOME/logs` directory.
Move into the `logs/` directory to see the type of information being logged (`$TOMCAT_HOME` is `/usr/local` in this example):

~~~bash
# cd /usr/local/tomcat/logs

# ls -l
-rw-r----- 1 root root 23451 Oct 24 14:17 catalina.2018-10-24.log
-rw-r----- 1 root root 23451 Oct 24 14:17 catalina.out
-rw-r----- 1 root root     0 Oct 24 13:41 host-manager.2018-10-24.log
-rw-r----- 1 root root  1929 Oct 24 14:17 localhost.2018-10-24.log
-rw-r----- 1 root root   859 Oct 24 13:45 localhost_access_log.2018-10-24.txt
-rw-r----- 1 root root     0 Oct 24 13:41 manager.2018-10-24.log
~~~

{% include question.html content="
Do you see a correspondence between some of the web applications in the Tomcat `webapps/` directory and the naming of certain log files?
" %}

{% include question.html content="
Is there a difference in the information being logged to `catalina.out` versus `catalina.yyyy-mm-dd.log`?
" %}

{% include question.html content="
Are some log files more verbose than others?
" %}

#### Try this exercise

Examining `catalina.out`.
Open another terminal window (here after referred to as terminal #2) and run the following command in the new terminal:

~~~bash
# tail -f /usr/local/tomcat/logs/catalina.out
~~~

In your original terminal window, start/stop and start Tomcat and watch what is being logged to `catalina.out` in the terminal #2 window.

{% include question.html content="
Is it only errors messages being reported to `catalina.out`?
" %}

## Things To Know About `catalina.out`

{% include note.html content="
The <a href=\"http://marc.info/?l=tomcat-user&w=2&r=1&s=catalina.out+rotate&q=b\" target=\"_blank\">Tomcat Users mailing list</a> has seen a lot of traffic dedicated to `catalina.out` logging and rotation.
" %}

* Tomcat `System.out` and `System.err` gets appended to `catalina.out`. `catalina.out` can **quickly grow large** if the hosted web applications are not specifically catching and logging `System.out` and `System.err` to designated files.
* `catalina.out` is not automatically rotated in Tomcat.
* You should employ an outside log rotation program (e.g., `logadm` or `logrotate`) to rotate `catalina.out`.
* It is good practice to archive and remove old `catalina.out` files and other log files out of the `$TOMCAT_HOME/logs` directory on a regular basis.

{%include note.html content="
On Windows, the `catalina.out` file is not automatically created. Instead only the `catalina.yyyy-mm-dd.log` files are used. These have equivalent content.
" %}


## Next Step

Next, we'll examine the [Tomcat Configuration Files](tomcat_configuration_files.html) and how to modify them for use with the TDS.